Full-time service
is a special way to serve Jehovah
with a joyful heart.
But what happens to your joy
when you suddenly face a serious trial?
Jay and Elaine Humer,
you have been through this.
Thank you for being here today
to share your personal experience with us.
You’ve enjoyed
full-time service for over 40 years,
many of those years in the traveling work.
Yes, we’ve had
the wonderful privilege of both pioneering
and serving
in the traveling work for 30 years now.
And we really feel that Jehovah has been
very kind to allow us to serve him this way.
I remember
when I first filled out my application
for regular pioneering back in 1972,
and I thought this was my gift
to Jehovah—my sacrifice.
But after the many years
of the blessings and the privileges
and how Jehovah helped us
through some very difficult times,
what I thought was my gift to Jehovah
turned out to be his gift to me.
This is very encouraging.
Thank you.
Now, you mentioned “difficult times.”
Is there anything
in particular you can think of?
One of the hardest things
that we faced was about 20 years ago
when we experienced
seven deaths in just a six-month period.
This really was difficult because five
of those seven were family members.
Jay’s father died,
my aunt Alma (who brought me
into the truth) died, and my father died.
So it just seemed
like one layer on top of another.
We can hardly imagine how you must have felt.
Now, after such a Job-like experience,
what did you do in order
to regain your joy and happiness?
Well, it didn’t occur automatically.
We kept focused, of course,
on serving the friends
and working with them,
and that kept our thoughts
from constantly circling around our losses.
We also thought about the resurrection.
We focused on the resurrection hope
and, as we did,
it became like “the helmet of salvation,”
protecting our hearts and our thoughts
from the grief that we were going through.
And then, of course,
we shared our hope with others,
and that helped us to have it more
deeply engraved on our own hearts as well.
Thank you.
So now, may we learn
from you what you did in practical terms?
The most difficult of all
was about four years after that
when our beloved nephew Christopher
was killed
in an auto accident at the age of 17.
He and his parents
had lived with us in the same house
for a number of years
before we went on the road.
And we always looked
at Christopher like the son
that we would never
have on this side of Armageddon.
So his death was particularly tragic.
It was excruciating for all of our
family members, especially his parents.
Christopher was on his way
to the Kingdom Hall
to meet his papa
and his grandmother for field service,
and his car hit a patch of ice
and slid into an oncoming car.
He died instantly.
This was so difficult for us.
Our hearts were broken,
and our spirits were nearly crushed.
It actually rendered me speechless,
even to beg for the “groanings
unuttered” became very difficult.
I didn’t speak to Jehovah for three days,
but I was listening.
What do you mean by “listening”?
I remember when we were
all together as a family,
and my sister just happened to say
that Christopher had been cremated.
We were there
making arrangements for the funeral,
and it just hit me so hard.
It was just—it just hit hard enough
that I fell down, and I just cried.
I laid there on the floor, and I thought,
perhaps, maybe Mary
felt this way when she said:
‘Lord, if you’d only been here
this wouldn’t have happened.’
But as I laid there,
I could hear my sister say:
“Go get her Bible.
Read her her favorite scripture.”
And so Jay did.
He turned to Psalm 91,
a psalm that I had already memorized,
and now I began to hear Jehovah’s voice.
So was this listening
to Jehovah a onetime occurrence?
No, by no means.
I really had to now do my research.
So I searched
for every article on the resurrection,
I searched for every scripture on comfort,
and I meditated on the artwork
—the pictures in the publications.
I remember one particular scripture
that really touched my heart.
It was from Psalm 56:8.
And there it said:
“You keep track of my wandering.
“Do collect my tears in your skin bottle.
Are they not recorded in your book?”
And I thought about Jehovah
taking such notice of us
—keeping track, watching over,
even collecting every tear
and recording each of them.
That truly made me draw close to Jehovah.
So you continued to listen to Jehovah
by looking at comforting material
from the publications.
Was there any
specific article you thought of?
There was an article.
It was about a delicate flower
that had been bent over after a rainstorm
—the kind of cloudburst that would
send humans and animals running for shelter,
but not this flower.
Here it was intact,
bent over but unbroken and still rooted.
I thought about us in that same way.
The article said that we can no more
avoid losing a loved one
than this flower could
uproot itself and run for cover.
It had to endure.
But the article spoke
a great deal about hope and about faith.
Hope is our anchor, and hope
is our preserver of our spirituality.
And faith
—James 1:3 stated there that faith—
when it succeeds, we’re able to endure.
And so that’s exactly what happened.
It softened the grief.
And so like this flower,
we too would stand up and smile one day.
And we did.
I remember the first time I smiled inside,
and I thought,
‘Oh, Jehovah,
you truly are a healer of hearts.’
So did you do something else?
Now I started looking
for some of the artwork in the publications.
And one particular picture
I found was of a shepherd
who had gone into
a bramble bush and rescued a lamb.
He was lost.
He pulled him out, threw him
over his shoulders, and held onto him.
And I thought, ‘What a safe place to be
—such security!’
I decided to take the picture
and to print it out
and just enlarge it a little bit.
But what I didn’t see
on the publication page,
I saw when I enlarged it, and there
were scratches on the shepherd’s face.
And I thought about what
that shepherd had gone through
to go in the bramble bush and pull him out.
And then, I thought about Jehovah
as our Great Shepherd
and the lengths that he
went through to rescue us,
even at the cost of pain for himself.
Now I was listening and drawing close,
back to Jehovah.
So, then, what did you do
with these articles and the pictures?
So now I decided to print them all out
—the articles, the pictures,
and the scriptures—
and I displayed them
on my desk for quite some time.
But then I put them
in a big envelope (or like a file),
and I thought that was
Jehovah’s sympathy card to me.
We knew that we had to do something
so as not to be swept away by our grief.
It’s been said that grief is an arduous
journey, but one that we cannot avoid.
It’s not a place where we live
but a passage, as it were.
And we know that even though grief
never goes away, it does change over time.
That’s because Jehovah
made our hearts to heal.
And so, in time, that’s what we did.
Yeah, we sure did.
It’s not about the lack of faith;
it’s simply the price of love.
We loved Christopher, and we miss him.
It wasn’t like we were leaving him behind.
Sometimes that’s how you feel
when you lose a loved one.
But in reality, we know
that Christopher is in Jehovah’s memory.
And as the righteous God,
Jehovah never forgets his loyal ones.
Christopher was one of them.
So we’re confident
that we’re going to see him again.
And that’s what
helps us not to be, as it were,
always looking in the rearview mirror
but looking ahead to the time
when we will be with him in Paradise.
You know, Jehovah truly kept his promises,
and he carried us through that storm.
He gathered up the pieces
of our broken hearts and sealed them.
And even though this happened 17 years ago,
sure, we still have cracks in our hearts.
But we know for a certainty
that those one day will disappear as well
in the Paradise
when we welcome him back home.
And so, Jehovah
truly proved to be my stronghold,
my Father, and my Friend in a profound way.
We learned that Jehovah truly does
love us, cares for us, and protects us.
And because he is such a good Father,
our joy has come back
and we have had such a rich life.
So in all the years that we’ve had
the privilege of serving our God,
we’ve always found
that no matter what we give Jehovah,
no matter what sacrifices
we make for him, he always gives us more.
You cannot out generous
the most generous Person in the universe.
And so, just as he has
blessed us all these many years,
we are confident
that he will continue to bless us
as we transition to our next assignment.
Thank you so much for sharing
your personal experiences with us.
And may Jehovah
continue to be with the two of you
as you now continue
your full-time service as special pioneers.
And may you be able to apply
the principles that you have just mentioned
so that Jehovah
can continue to “guard your hearts.”
Thank you.